On 10th November, after much speculation, the Raspberry Pi Foundation 
officially revealed the Raspberry Pi A+ model. In much the same way that the 
model A was a Raspberry Pi model B with half the available RAM and the wired 
network and USB interfaces replaced with a single USB socket. The model A+ 
mirrors the model B+ (launched on July 14th) with the same modifications, but 
also with a shorter printed circuit board. The model B+ is 85mm long, the model 
A+ is only 65mm long. The model A+ has also been on a diet and drops from 41g 
to 23g in weight. The processor is the standard Broadcom BCM2835 SoC used on 
all of the Raspberry Pi products but the A+, like the A, only has 256MB of RAM.

So we now have a powerful computer which is 20mm smaller than a credit card that
has a retail price of $20 plus taxes & shipping. That's a $5 reduction on the 
list price of the model A.

The first thing that strikes you are the mounting holes (which looked a bit 
odd on the B+); they have now moved to each corner of the A+. The GPIO pins are 
in the same place and we've got the full 40-pin header. The left hand 26-pins
are "plug compatible" with the original model A & B. More on that later when I 
try all of my model B peripherals on my model A+.

Looking at the top of the board apart from the GPIO pins & USB there are five 
other connectors. Working from left to right they are the DSI (display 
interface), micro USB socket (purely for power), HDMI, CSI (camera interface) 
and the combined 3.5mm audio and analogue video socket. The microUSB socket 
moved round the corner. The 3.5mm socket moved from the top of the board to the 
bottom right. The other three are in roughly the same place as before. The 
yellow AV and blue/black audio are now combined in a single socket.

Turning the board over there are some components, lots of test points (so that 
Sony can trap any dud boards during manufacture) and the microSD card slot. 
That's a bit different from the model A & B where it was a full size slot so 
we're going to have to clone our full-size SD cards to microSD cards before 
we can use them in a model A+. 

So all in all what we have is an superb tiny computer. It's got lots of 
processing power in an incredibly small package. It's going to be the Raspberry
Pi of choice for anyone who needs the lowest weight and smallest footprint (and
it fits in an Altoids tin).

As usual with each of the new Raspberry Pis; Alex Eames (http://RasPi.TV) has 
done some power usage measurements. (You can find his complete results on his
website.) He did a sequence of four tests on a model B, model B+ and his new
model A+. His conclusion is that the Raspberry Pi A+ uses 70% less power than 
the old model A. That means the folks who want to launch their Raspberry Pi to
40Km under a helium balloon not only have a lower payload mass, but will get 
more run-time before their batteries go flat. It also means I can run my 
Raspberry Pi A+ powered by the mains for a whole year for less than one pound.
I'm sure we'll see lots of robot projects that are based around a Raspberry Pi
A+ rather than the other models.

The current versions of NOOBS, NOOBS lite and the other OS images from 
http://www.raspberrypi.org/download will all work on a model A+, we just need a 
USB microSD carrier or a microSD to SD adapter to work with those on our 
Windows, Linux or MAC OSX systems. The existing instructions don't change, the 
process of building a bootable microSD card is the same. [For my first tests 
with the model A+ I simply cloned an existing SD card to a microSD card. The 
process for doing that is well documented on http://www.raspberrypi.org/forum 
(the fount of all knowledge).]

So we boot Raspbian on the model A+ and take a look at the differences from a 
software point of view. First major difference is that the A+ only has half the 
available RAM (256MB) compared to a model B or B+ (512MB). The second
difference is that (unless we use a USB WiFi dongle, USB wired ethernet dongle
or SPI ENC28J60 SPI ethernet board) there is NO NETWORK. We're also going to 
need a USB HUB because a USB keyboard, USB mouse and USB WiFi won't all fit in
a single USB socket. That may appear as a limitation but the weight savings
from not having those connectors is a bonus and worth it.

For the average model A+ user (if you don't have another Raspberry Pi) I'd 
recommend getting a Tenda W311M Wireless-N150 USB WiFi dongle which has the 
RT5370 chipset or an Edimax EW-7811Un (rtl8188cus chipset) nano USB dongle as
both of those have the drivers built-in to the standard Raspbian distribution.
Remember without a working network you'd get into a catch-22 situation if you
try to use a WiFi dongle that needs a special driver downloaded from the 
Internet unless you can use another Raspberry Pi to get the driver downloaded
onto your microSD card. My WiPi (Ralink Technology, Corp. RT5370) dongle worked
as soon as I configured my WiFi SSID and password. 

If you have an unsupported WiFi dongle you'll need to pre-install the firmware
by booting your microSD card on a model B or B+ or will need to jump through
some hoops (copying installation files to the FAT partition on an SDCard) to
get your dongle working.

I had an SPI ENC28J60 ethernet board in my box of Arduino bits. I've given that
a go by building a custom made Linux kernel. So with some work it is possible 
to get wired interface running (without using a USB/ethernet interface).

The way we test which model of Raspberry Pi we're running on is to look at the
special /proc virtual file system created by the Linux kernel. It has lots of 
interesting information.

<< note to layout --- insert aplus.cpuinfo.txt in a CODE block here >>

The only thing that differs (apart from the unique serial number) is Revision.
The Raspberry Pi Foundation has given the A+ a revision number of 0x0012. 

The first peripheral I tested was a Fish Dish (see the article in MagPi Issue 
#25 page 12) that simply fits the GPIO pins with the board overhanging the 
new pins on the A+. It gives us a piezo beeper, a switch and three LEDs 
connected to pins 8, 7, 4, 9 & 22 respectively. There's no problem getting a 
simple GPIO board like that working with the A+. If the connector fits and
we line the board up on the compatible pins it will work.

Next test was with my ModMyPi 8X8 matrix. That fits OK, although the board is
a bit wobbly because it normally rests on the current smoothing capacitor on
a model B and that component is gone on the A+, but it's not something we can't
find a quick fix for with some insulated packing.

I then tested my PiFaceCAD. This one is too long for the A+, so the end of the 
PiFace board hangs over the USB plug (for my 4-port hub). On a fresh install of 
Raspbian there were the python PiFace packages to install with 
  sudo apt-get install python{,3}-piface*
Once those extra software packages were installed it worked with no problems. 
Again the board is a bit wobbly because it's designed to rest on the ethernet, 
video and audio connectors on a model B. 

Following on from my Arduberry article in issue #28 it made sense to test that
peripheral. It has the same wobble, but fits OK and runs in exactly the same way
that it runs on my model B.

I also have a Wolfson audio board, but it is impossible to use that or rig that
to run on an A+ as the P5 header has been eliminated (in the same way it has gone
from the B+). That board will only run on second generation model Bs or 
model As 

The final test was with my Quick2Wire GPIO expander board. It uses a ribbon cable
to connect the GPIO pins on my model B to the expansion board. That connector 
would not fit the 40-pin header on the A+ so I'll have to build a new cable 
with a 40-pin IDC connector on one end and a 26-pin IDC connector on the other. 
For a quick test I rigged it up with a collection of female to female dupont 
wires. That's a problem with any add-on that uses an insulation-displacement 
(IDC) connector as a short IDC plug usually won't fit a longer header.

With the model B+ there has been some trouble for folks who can't use HDMI and
choose analogue audio and video but can't get a video signal to work. There is
no standard for the connections for a four pole 3.5mm jack.  Matt Hawkins has 
an excellent web page/blog entry at 
http://www.raspberrypi-spy.co.uk/2014/07/raspberry-pi-model-b-3-5mm-audiovideo-jack/ 
which clears up the confusion. That same info works with the model A+. My monitor 
and both my TVs have HDMI so I've not tested the analog audio or video.

So to summarise, we've got the fifth member of the Raspberry Pi family (including
the Compute Module). The new A+ has lots of similarities with the older model A
but more similarities with the newer B+. The primary features are the 40-pin
header which exposes the extra GPIO pins and the second I2C interface, the 
whole package is 20mm shorter than the A, B or B+ boards and weighs less than
those three. We've lost half of the RAM but for the type of sophisticated 
controller applications that we will be running on our model A+ Raspberry Pis
that won't be a limitation. The model A+ is a perfect replacement for the 
model A (launched in Feb 2013). The biggest limitation is the lack of any 
on-board networking, so most folks will need to buy a supported USB WiFi dongle 
or will need a USB ethernet adapter. In terms of price we can't go wrong with a 
model A+, it is the cheapest of all of the Raspberry Pis.